### Introduction

An important task of the National Archives in the Netherlands is to make archivesas accessible as possible. In the past years, much has been invested in digitization and making the collections digitally searchable. Another priority isto invest in making archives meaningful for many groups in society. People who traditionally were marginalised (because of colour, gender, sexual preference, religion, disability etc.) didn’t receive much attention and are often hard to find in the archives. Because their presence in the archives is often invisible, traces of their lives can often only be found with great difficulty. An important question is whether and how digitization offers opportunities to change this. In this project we focus on archives whichoriginated in the context of colonial rule and are the administrative output of colonial state agencies and colonizing activities from the 17th to the 20th century. In the current debate, archival institutions are being challenged to rethink (decolonise) how to engage with these archives and how these archives are made accessible and interpretable. In that context the National Archives wants to investigate whether it is possible to un-silence what has been silenced in archival processes.New opportunities may arise with the emergence of HTR (Handwritten Text Recognition) technology,which makes handwritten texts computer readable. In this project, we will explore the possibilities to develop a strategy to identify marginalised and silenced voices in these archives.

### The Problem 

The Dutch East India Company offered jobs to thousands of people as sailor, soldier and servant working in the trading posts. Since there was always a risk that people would die while serving the VOC, many officials went to one of the VOC-notaries in Batavia, Cape of Good Hope or other places to notarize their will. Copies of these wills were sent to the headquarters of the Company in Amsterdam. Nowadays, these wills are important sources providing insights into the private lives of common people. Recently, the Dutch National Archives made available online an index with names of more than 10,000 testators and digitized the corresponding handwritten documents (in Dutch: Oost-Indische Testamenten). The index of names was made by archivists in the nineteenth century. Although husband and wife frequently went together to the notary to draw up a will, and in spite of 
the fact that in such cases both names—husband and wife—are equally mentioned in the testaments, the nineteenth century index only refers to the male testator. The nineteenth century view of male dominance and obfuscation of female presence in the archival infrastructure is preserved and continued in the twenty-first century search infrastructure. Examining the notarial deeds even more carefully, it appears that in many instances not only the names of husband and wife, but also the names of local, indigenous people (men and women) in many different roles are mentioned, such as beneficiary, housemate, creditor, debtor or enslaved property. Although shadows of their voices were recorded, a nineteenth century archival world view, materialized in the compiled index, not only obscured women, but also the indigenous population. This is problematic. In line with the current policy of the Dutch National Archives to pay more attention to diversity and inclusion, it is undesirable that a 19th century archival world view is perpetuated andrevitalized via the newly developed digital archival infrastructuresince it renders women and indigenous people invisible.

### Output

Recently, the technical accessibility of these VOC-testaments has improved. With the use of Tranksribus’ HTR tool these texts have been transcribed and made machine-readable (with a certain margin of error) by the National Archives. Such developments offer new possibilities to investigate the extent to which non-indexed persons can be made visible with the help of artificial intelligence. We are particularly interested in giving a voice to the marginalized, silenced indigenous population.

In this project, we worked with these transcribed documents to explore ways to extract names or qualifiers for people present in these testaments using automated methods and natural language processing. Starting with a close reading of these testaments, we understood the caveats of these documents and its silences——both in the indexing as well as in the creation of these documents. We close read the documents by comparing the transcribed text and the orignal scans of the testaments and creating annotations using an annotation tool: [BRAT](https://brat.nlplab.org/). In BRAT, we defined certain entities and relations to work with. For more information, look at the BRAT folder in this repository.

Of particular interest to us, were qualifiers that designated women and indigenous peoples. For example: 'vrouw', 'suster', 'slavinne' for women and 'Slaaf', 'de moor', 'inboorling' for indigenous peoples. Based on our annotations of around 200 pages of the testaments, we were able to collect a set of terms that designated men, women, indigenous peoples (as well as for geopolitical entities and organisations). Using these set of terms, we created an index for women and indigenous for the folder 6847 of the testaments, but similar indices could be created for any or all of the folders in the VOC testaments. These indices clearly under report the presence of peoples, however the result is clearly powerful. For example, we can easily determine what percentage of pages of a certain folder contain at least one mention of an indigengous person or a woman, and more importantly we can quickly go to the pages with mentions of indigenous persons to know more about their lives or how they are described in these documents. Thus, we believe that our indices can be integrated by the National Archives in their search to allow for researchers and any users to be able to search for the presence of women and indigenous persons in these testaments, thus making these archives **more inclusive and accesible**!

Furthermore, we also experimented with [spaCy](https://spacy.io/) to perform named entity recognition (NER) on these testaments. The reason we chose spaCy was because it has a model pretrained in Dutch and due to its usability. Unfortunately, NER on the testaments provided unsatisfactory results. This is because spaCy is trained on 20th century Dutch news and is unable to handle 17th and 18th century Dutch from the testaments. This would require retraining the model, the pipeline for which we tried to implement. We also tried to correct frequent mistakes, and got a 10% improvement, which is a start. With more time and resources, we believe that it would be a worthwhile endeavour to retrain spaCy to be able to output names of peoples, places and organisations in these documents.
